Hello everybody and
welcome to session 216.
I'm Nick Burns as the
voice of God just said.
I work on GLSL and the
OpenGL team at Apple.
It's really fun, really exciting.
I hope you guys can learn
something from it today.
So, before we get started,
the next slide that I'm going to
show you is a GLSL vertex shader.
We're going to delve right into it.
Now, a lot of you may not
understand this at first,
but I hope after this session,
you will understand what's going on.
So, bam!
Here is a rather simple
GLSL vertex shader.
For those who are not familiar with GLSL,
you may not understand
what the words attribute,
uniform and varying mean.
Well, those are just qualifiers that
qualify the vertex B variable,
weight, text score.
I didn't name these variables.
Somebody else did.
Anyway.
So hopefully at the end of this session,
beginners will understand
this a little bit more.
Anyway, let's go on.
So, many of you are probably
wondering what GLSL is.
So, for a very simple,
quick introduction,
GLSL allows you to program the GPU to
replace certain parts of the pipeline
that I will show you later and
actually put your own control in there.
So you can do your own operations
instead of the fixed function TCL and
fixed function fragment processing,
you can do pretty much whatever you want,
experiment, have fun.
We'll talk about this a little
bit more and show you some demos.
Just to get you started,
So GLSL is the path forward for OpenGL.
OpenGL ES 2.0 is very shader-centric.
So why don't we go on and
see what it's all about.
Maybe it's cool, maybe it's not.
We'll see.
Hopefully, hopefully cool.
So what you'll learn,
what I hope you'll learn in this session,
for the beginners among us,
I hope you'll start to
understand what GLSL is.
I'll give you a quick introduction
and I'll point you to some references
and some examples that we have that
are already on the seed and they've
been out there since Xcode 2.3.
I will give you some hints
for working with hardware.
Hardware is fun to work with.
Think of it that way.
It's not hard and mean and punch
you in the stomach and the back,
those types of things.
Anyway, I'll give you some tips and
tricks to keep yourself alive
when you're working with hardware.
And lastly,
I'll hand off to Raav from ATI,
who will present the Toy Shop demo and
some of the technologies behind it,
such as the HLSL to GLSL conversion.
What are shaders?
Shaders are made up of a few parts.
They're encapsulated within objects.
We have shader objects and
we have program objects.
And these objects take certain inputs,
they produce certain outputs,
and you can replace certain
bits of the pipeline,
which I will show you later, I promise.
The inputs to the vertex shader are
vertices that aren't transformed
and some uniform values such as
any uniforms that you provide,
generic ones,
or the built-in ones that are provided
by the fixed function pipeline,
matrices,
and other fun uniforms and such.
There are also attributes
for vertex data.
Any data that you want to
pass in with the vertices,
such as weighting for vertices
for vertex skinning and a
whole bunch of other stuff,
you can use them for generic purposes.
We'll go into that a
little bit more later.
Vertex Shaders produce outputs,
transformed vertices.
Seeing as it replaced the
fixed function pipeline,
you have to actually do what
the fixed function pipeline did.
It took vertices in, transformed them,
did some lighting calculations,
interpolated some values across
variances for the fragment shader.
So you just have to do
the work that it did,
or whatever work you want to do,
and then it just goes on
to the fragment shader.
So the fragment shader then takes
these vertices that are transformed
and variances that were interpolated
across the face of the polygon
and outputs a fragment color,
a fragment depth,
whatever you want to the frame buffer
and any associated depth buffers,
anything attached to it.
The program object is just
an encapsulator for the
vertex and fragment shaders.
It's not very complicated.
It's just a way for the programmer
to access GLSL in a very easy,
intuitive way.
So we'll go into this a little bit more,
but first let's go with
a more realistic example.
You've been giving me, say,
all these fancy words like attribute
and varying and uniform and ooh.
So here is the fixed function pipeline.
I'll build it slowly.
You've probably seen
this from the Red Book.
So let's take a look, Sean.
As I said before, we have incoming vertex
data and pixel data.
This is then transformed and lit
by the vertex processing stage.
The values that are produced from the
vertex processing stage are interpolated
across the face of the polygon,
sent to the fragment stage,
which then rasterizes and produces
the fragments that go to the frame
buffer and other stuff happens to.
But we're not concerned
with that right now.
You can't program that yet.
The vertex shader replaces the
transform clipping and lighting stage,
like I said before,
and the fragment shader replaces
the rasterization stage.
So you can control the
rasterization aspects,
the transformation aspects,
you can do a whole bunch of,
just a world of effects and cool
things like you saw in my colleague
Alex Eddy's demos and whatnot.
And if any of you have tried Showpiece,
it's there too,
along with a bunch of cool teapots.
None of those bunnies.
This is a zero bunny demonstration here.
No bunnies.
I'm not harming any bunnies either, so...
But there are giant lizards, okay?
If you're gonna kill the bunnies,
you have to get giant lizards instead.
So here is a nice giant gecko
lizard-y thingy from Modo.
They provided this nice image for us.
Why don't we take a look at it?
This is a more realistic example instead
of attributes and vertices and blah,
blah, blah.
So here we have a mesh that
has some texture coordinates.
Why don't we put the mesh on it?
Here you can see the scope of how
many vertices we have in this case.
I mean, there are probably thousands
of vertices for this scene.
I haven't counted each one of them up,
but if one of you guys want to do that
and give me the number in a second,
go for it.
Now, why don't we zoom in a little bit?
Take a look at his palette here.
You can see that you have
a lot of vertices that are
getting transformed here,
and there are also a lot more
fragments and vertices in this case.
So why don't we take a
little closer look here.
So keep in mind that the vertex shader is
going to be running once per each vertex.
So whatever you write to replace
the vertex shader portion of
the pipeline will be run once
per all these thousand vertices.
Now let's get an idea of where the
scope hits for fragment shaders.
Zoom in a little bit.
Okay, there we go.
Now, you can see a nicely pixelated
version of this triangle on the
palette of this giant gecko.
Why don't we take a look at how many
fragments potentially are in this,
at least in one scan line.
So here you can get,
maybe you'll get an idea of
how many fragments are actually
being rasterized for this gecko.
As I said before,
there are probably thousands
of vertices in this scene.
Well,
there are probably millions of fragments.
A thousand times the number
of vertices in this scene.
The fragment shader is going to
be run once per each of those.
The variances are going to be
interpolated for each fragment.
So any of the varying output values,
such as text coordinates,
that's why you can see the texture
varying instead of just like
one solid color per triangle.
It actually varies across
the face of the polygon.
It does that with
variances and text cords.
So why don't we take a look at that,
shall we?
Ooh, look at this snazzy blue line.
So, now you get a little
introduction of what GLSL is,
you probably want to know
where you can actually use it.
Well, it turns out it's actually
been around since Tiger.
So, take a look in Tiger, use it,
try it out.
There you have GLSL 1.10 and in Leopard,
we plan on getting OpenGL 2.1
support along with GLSL 1.2.
Well, GLSL 1.2 has just been
recently announced,
that's why it's not
in the seed right now.
There's a lot of work for me to do and
I'll try to get it done for you people.
Now you get an idea of where
it's all-- what's all going
on and where it's supported.
Why don't we just jump into a little,
small, simple demo.
This is the Hello GLSL demo.
We will hopefully have it
available soon for developers on
a-- on the developer examples,
maybe with the next release of Xcode.
We'll figure that whole thing out later.
So now I want to switch to that machine.
There we go.
No, wrong machine.
Uh, this is A.
There we go.
Lots of fun demos.
All right,
let's take a look at Hello GLSL.
Right now, I am drawing a triangle,
just a blue triangle.
Nothing fancy, and it's blue.
Nobody really likes blue,
especially this shade of blue.
Don't know what Kent was thinking.
Anyway, so here's our blue triangle.
This is going through the
fixed function pipeline,
just drawing a triangle, nothing fancy.
Now I'm going to press space.
Boom.
Now we're using a shader.
Now we're not doing anything
really fancy with the shader,
but you can see that we're perturbing the
colors of this triangle using varings.
So why don't we delve into this
a little bit more and switch
back to the other machine.
Um, switch back to the other machine.
Slides, please.
All right.
Now you saw that simple example.
Let's go in behind the scenes
a little bit and I'll show you
what's actually going on here.
So you've seen the triangle.
You saw how it went from that
blue to an awesome multicolored
psychedelic triangle.
How do we actually do that?
Let's take a look at the steps that
are required to get GLSL into your
application and then go through how to
actually do each of those six steps.
The first step you're going
to want to do to get GLSL in,
please check for extensions.
You have to do this.
Make sure the extension that you want
is on the renderer that you have chosen.
If you don't do this,
you will... stuff bad will happen.
Bad.
Check for extensions.
Then we want to make some shaders.
The shaders that we used
for that Hello GLSL example,
I'll show you and walk you
through them step by step.
Next we'll show how to compile them,
link them, and use them at the end.
Here is the vertex shader
that was used for Hello GLSL.
It's really not very complicated.
It's actually simpler than
the one you saw before.
It has variances like
we were talking about.
And you'll notice that we
have a varying VEC3 color.
That's the output of this vertex
shader to the fragment shader.
So this color will be interpolated
across the fragments of the polygon.
You'll see that we have
a function called main.
That main will be
executed for each vertex.
Keep that in mind if you have
a really vertex-heavy or really
vertex-not-heavy application.
Same for the fragment shader.
We'll go into that a
little bit more later.
Now, you can see that the color is a
function of the incoming vertex value.
Now, the vertices in that example
went from 0 to 1 and 0 to 1.
That's why we saw colors, you know,
going in, in this case, red and blue.
And lastly, we transform the position,
like I said we had to do before,
and put that into-- we
transform the incoming vertex
and put that into GL position.
That's the output position of this.
I'll show you some more
examples of this later,
but--
That's that for now.
Now, the Fragment Shader is even simpler.
It's just one line.
It takes the incoming varying
value from the Vertex Shader,
interpolated it across
the face of the polygon,
and puts it into the Fragment Color.
That might sound all fancy and crazy,
but it's just setting a color.
But it does it once per fragment,
keep in mind.
Now we have some shaders.
Two awesome shaders.
Three lines total.
Wow.
Let's compile these shaders, shall we?
Let's make some shader objects, use them,
and draw that awesome
little triangle that we saw.
So in order to compile your shaders,
all you have to really do
is send the source to GL,
tell it to compile your shader,
That's pretty much it.
Check for some errors and be a nice,
good GL citizen.
Next,
we want to set up the program object.
First, we create a program object.
Then we attach both vertex and
fragment shader that we just compiled
previously to this program object.
This allows us to easily use
this GLSL program that we made.
It'll activate it when we turn it on,
and it will deactivate
it when we turn it off.
Next, we want to link the program.
This is even easier than the other steps.
Just link.
Check for errors again.
Make sure everything's hunky-dory.
Lastly,
now that we have this awesome shader,
compiled, linked,
we've got a program object,
everything's all together,
let's use it and draw a triangle.
So all you have to do
is use program object,
the program object you just made,
draw some triangle, GLBegin, GLVertex,
or use a VBO.
It will be activated and replace
those portions of the fixed function
pipeline that I showed you earlier.
Then when you're done,
deactivate the shader.
That's it.
I showed you in the original
shader that I didn't really go
over in the Hello GLSL example
are the Uniform and Attribute API.
So you can set the
generic uniform values,
basically constants in your program.
To do this,
you just have to make a uniform in your
shader like the original one showed.
So it would be like uniform float A.
Now here, you would just go get
uniform location of A.
Then it gives you the location,
which would be some number.
You don't really care.
Don't look at the numbers.
Behind the scenes, you know,
ignore the number.
And then you just set the
value of that uniform.
So in this case, it's setting a vec4,
but you could set other values.
Please look at the uniform
API in the orange book.
Similarly, you do the same type of
thing with attributes,
except attributes are per vertex data.
[Transcript missing]
www.nickbruns.com/subs.htm